# Chapter 1: Introduction

There is no master plan. There is no secret get-rich-quick outsourcing scheme that can change your life and turn you into a global New York Times best-selling sex icon. Books like The Four Hour Work Week sell a dream, and they sell it as “anyone can do this”. Everyone wants to believe that. That’s why sales are so prolific. But unfortunately it isn’t quite that simple. If everyone could come up with a spontaneous business ideas that they could outsource to a third world country and work a few hours a week to join the “new rich” … there would probably be a lot more people doing it.

To be honest with you. Not everyone can do this. In fact the majority of people have no chance of ever doing it. Very few people are ever going to quit their safe jobs, start a business, outsource it, and somehow make lots of money while doing very little. It’s just not realistic.

But, there are a few people who are in a unique position where they are able to continue doing their existing work whilst travelling the world. Those people are (for the most part) programmers, graphic designers, and writers. There are others, certainly, but these three groups of people are the best placed by far, at present. If your work is based entirely on a computer and you work for yourself - this book is for you.

This isn’t a business book - there aren't any instructions about how to work less or make more money. The assumption is that you run your own company or you’re a freelancer who already does all that. If you’re not - consider that a prerequisite to this book. This book assumes that you’re a computer-based person working for yourself, or a company that doesn't require you to be in an office, and that you take home a minimum of £1,000 a month. Those are the only real requirements. If you can do that, you can do this.

## How it all Started

I’ve been working as a web designer since I was in high-school. At the time, I had little interest in school work, a lot of interest in music. When I went to university to study music a few years later, I quickly discovered that I was never going to be a great musician - so instead I started trying to help local bands and artists who I thought were truly great by making websites for them. A few years later I found myself working at a design agency, then a startup, then eventually I threw in the towel on employment and decided to go freelance.  Since 2008 I’ve been running my own web design business, working entirely and exclusively for myself. 

In late 2009 I secured Virgin Atlantic Airways as a client. They wanted me to design and build a travel blog for them - which I did - and it’s here that the story really began. Once the contract was completed, Virgin called me up one day to mention that they’d been invited on a press trip (a group trip to destination for travel journalists to write about the place and get exposure for them) to Valencia, Spain. The trip was centred entirely around the Formula One Grand Prix of Europe, which was taking place that week. They didn’t have the capacity to send anyone from Virgin… but they knew I was a Formula One junkie… and would I like to go on their behalf and blog about it for them when I got back?

Erm. Yes please?

The trip was incredible. Sixteen of us were flown into Spain in June 2010 to be ferried around in 5 star luxury and experience all the wonders of the Valencia region, as well as the city itself. It wasn’t traditional press, however, it was a new kind of trip (really, one of the very, very first of its kind) focused entirely on travel bloggers rather than travel journalists. For 10 days we were guided from beach to hotel to grand prix. I remember vividly sitting in a restaurant overlooking the ocean with local boys cliff-jumping just outside and thinking “This life isn’t so bad… It’s certainly a lot more interesting than sitting around in the UK.” The trip ended, I returned to the UK, and within a matter of weeks I’d forgotten all about that other life of interest and possibility. I settled back into my routine and forgot all about my plans to try and travel more.

Luckily for me, I’d befriended the trip organisers and talked to them at length about blogging, social media, WordPress, and all the things that we’d been doing online in design and technology for years that the travel industry was only just discovering. About a month later I got invited on another trip to Spain, this time not on behalf of Virgin Atlantic - but just as myself.

2010 and 2011 carried on like this. I kept talking to travel industry reps and bloggers about marketing and technology, and I kept getting invited on more press trips (or “blog trips” - as they were quickly becoming known). I started speaking at travel blogging conferences, working with more travel brands, and quickly discovered that there was an unbelievable amount of potential for design/tech savvy people in this market. The tourism industry was, and still is, unbelievably behind when it comes to technology. 

In June 2011, I was back in Valencia at the Formula One Grand Prix. Just 12 months later, the concept  of “blog trips” had exploded around the world, and the Spanish Tourist Board were keen to repeat the success with another iteration of the trip that started it all. It was here that two very pivotal ideas started. 

First, repeatedly seeing a lack of understanding of social media and technology in travel and tourism - I came up with an idea to start website to act as a sort of Mashable or ProBlogger of travel. I sat down with three of the other people on the trip one evening in the hotel, and Travelllll.com was born.

Second, I met a guy called Anil Polat. He’s the one who’s really responsible for this book existing. I think everyone who lives this lifestyle can pinpoint the moment when the seed was planted, and the idea grew out of it. For me, this was meeting Anil. Or, more specifically, getting ludicrously drunk with Anil in the middle of Valencia. It took us over 2 hours to find our way back to the hotel. Which doesn’t sound too bad until you consider that it had only taken us 10 minutes to get from the hotel to the bar at the beginning of the night.

Anil started travelling with a group of friends a few years ago, they started a blog called “FoxNomad” and travelled the world writing about the places they visited. One by one, they scratched the itch… got tired… and went home. But Anil didn’t stop. He took over the website by himself, and just kept going. He doesn’t live anywhere, and he carries everything he owns in a backpack. He goes wherever he wants and travel the world indefinitely. I’d read The Four Hour Work Week years previously. But I’d never met a real-live-person who actually lived the “nomadic lifestyle” and didn’t have a home. For the subsequent 3-4 hours I pummelled Anil with the questions which I’ve now come to recognise so well as people ask me the same things. I now know how very bored he must have been from hearing those questions, yet again, but he didn’t show a hint of it. 

How much does it cost? I asked. How long have you been doing it? How long are you going to go on for? What about keeping your $2,000 laptop safe? Where does your mail go? How do you afford long haul flights? How do your work cope with being different timezones all the time? So you don’t own anything? Where do you stay? How do you choose where to go next? I’m having another beer, do you want one? Yes of course I know the way back to the hotel! You’re right, rum and coke would definitely go down better.

So we talked. Or rather, Anil patiently entertained my persistent inquisition into his entire life. By the end of the night I couldn’t help but wonder if this was something I could do. According to Anil it only cost between £500-£800 a month to do what he was doing, depending on where you went and how cheap you were willing to live. I was paying £1800 a month to live in the UK , not luxuriously at all, and he seemed like he was having a lot more fun than me. It was probably this, more than anything, that set the cogs in motion.

## Making a Decision

Back in the UK again. I realised that a year later, I’d been on a lot of these trips now. Every time I was on them I felt invigorated, challenged, stimulated and… you know… happy. Every time I made a vow to do something about it, and then promptly got back to the UK and fell back into my routine. Routine is the mother of all fuckups for creativity. It stifles it, and tells it to go away. 

This time I was determined to do something. This time I had Anil’s voice going around in my head about how it all worked, and how it wasn’t that hard. I bought a book about travelling around the world on Amazon, read a large quantity of travel blogs written by permanently vagrant people, and set myself a deadline. Lots of people set deadlines for making important decisions. They say “I will decide what to do about [something] by next Friday.” - This doesn’t really work. Setting a deadline doesn’t give you any magical inspiration to assess which option is better. I did it a little differently. I told myself that if I hadn’t come up with a valid and unavoidable reason not to do it by the end of July, then I would just have to do it. I find this works better. Especially for big life-changing decisions where there is no right answer.

The end of July came, and I’d thought about it a lot. There would be a lot of challenges to overcome, but I couldn’t think of any unavoidable reasons not to do it. So I started selling my stuff, and I made a plan to start by visiting a couple of my best friends in Australia. A few days later, bizarrely, I was contacted by WordCamp Gold Coast asking if I would consider speaking at the conference they were organising in November - and offering to fly me there. Apparently the universe agreed with my plans and was deciding to give me a nudge. So I wrote a blog post…

http://john.onolan.org/the-next-chapter/

and booked a flight. 

## No turning back now.

On November 2nd at 10:55am GMT, I left the UK indefinitely on Singapore Airlines flight 317 bound for Brisbane, Australia. This book is the story of how I’ve figured out how to travel, work, survive, and enjoy myself for the first year. What I discovered very quickly is that most of the advice out there in books and blogs just didn’t apply to me. There’s lots (and lots) of information for backpackers, lots of stuff for gap year students, lots of stuff for “how to quit your job and travel the world” career changes, and lots of stuff about working remotely. Most of them are either about how to travel the world on $2 a day and stay in hostels with 20 other people sharing your room every night… or 500 pages convincing you why travel is great and how to quit the job you hate to do it. I trawled through hundreds of books, articles, videos, documentaries, and countless interviews with travellers to piece together what would work for someone with a full-time income, looking to travel full-time as a lifestyle choice. 
I’m not a backpacker, I’m not obsessed with seeing every country in the world or learning every language and every culture, I don’t hate my job or my life and need an escape. I just enjoy travel. I love waking up to a different view every month or two, I love meeting new people, I love seeing different parts of the world and trying new things. I travel the world because I love being challenged. I travel the world, quite frankly, because I can.

## So What’s This Book About?

I move from country to county, usually staying in each place for 1-2 months at a time. I rent short term apartments and settle into local life, exploring a little, kiteboarding a lot, and generally enjoying the changing the scenery whilst still working every day from my laptop as normal. A lot of people have asked me how I do what I do. So I’ve taken everything I’ve learned in a year of doing this, as well all the information from all those different places that is relevant, and put it into this book. No nonsense. Just as much information as I can pack into one book about how to do what I do, if you’re interested in trying it yourself.

There’s one very important thing that I want to get cleared up before we get started though. If you think that anyone out their living this lifestyle didn’t have to give up anything to do it, you’re dreaming. People often tell me they’re jealous of my lifestyle. Particularly when I’m posting photos of kiteboarding in sunny locations – which seems to attract particularly loud choruses of “go fuck yourself”. The reality is that most people want the positives of this lifestyle, but they will never be willing to make the sacrifices. I don’t see family, I don’t see friends, I gave up my dog (who I love more than anything), I don’t own any personal possessions beyond my camera, laptop, and kite (at all), I don’t watch TV, I don’t have a place to call home, I don’t know where my next paycheque will come from, I have no way of having a serious relationship with anyone, I can’t buy anything, and there is never anyone around me who I’ve known for longer than a few weeks. The bigger the benefits of what you want, the bigger the sacrifices will inevitably be.

**Everything comes at a price. You have to be willing to pay it.**

Lastly - you need to keep one thing in mind as your read. As you start mulling over the endless question of “yeah, but could I actually do it?” the further you get into the book - remember this: You will never be sure, and there is never a right time.

I wasn’t sure about going into web design after studying music at university. I wasn’t sure about leaving my agency job to start freelancing. I definitely wasn’t sure about selling everything I owned to travel the world. In fact, I was completely fucking terrified on every occasion that it was going to be a huge mistake. Even once you’ve got past the timing and the sacrifices and you’ve made the decision… You still won’t be sure. Sometimes you’ll feel like you’re crazy and, helpfully, others will often confirm this for you. People are afraid of change, including you. The question is whether or not you can overcome it.

You will never be ready. You will never have enough money. You will never reach some magical point in your life where the universe says “Ok bro, now is the moment, go for it. lol.” There will always be huge barriers to making a change in your life. Don’t think that everyone else falls into doing that-thing-you-want-to-do by luck or chance. They fought to get there. There is no right time to go freelance, to start a company, to change career, to find a better relationship, to travel the world, to move to a new country. There never will be.

**It will always require a leap of faith.**