# Chapter 3: Places

Before you start travelling the world, you’ll probably want to get a rough idea of some places to go. Deciding where to travel to when it’s not for a holiday is actually quite hard - because you’re not just going there to relax - you’re going there to live and work, too… and what do you even base a decision like that on? Also, once you get there, how long do you stay? These are things that you figure out as you go, and they’re completely different for everyone. But I’ll give you an idea of what works for me and you can decide what parts you like, and what parts you’d want to do differently.

## Where To Go

Initially, I struggled a great deal with where to go. Some people have a natural instinctive desire to explore, or even a pre-written list of places that they want to go. I have neither. I travel, again, because I enjoy the lifestyle - not because I want to see everything. So it’s quite different. Luckily, for my first stop it wasn’t too hard. I wanted to visit my friends in Australia, and then a conference speaking invitation sealed that deal completely - conveniently saving me from a laboured decision on “where to go”. My friends in Australia, naturally, didn’t understand this at all. They wanted to show me everything and I was asked, many times, what I wanted to see and do. An answer of “nothing in particular, really” was not deemed to be satisfactory. If you are the type of person who wants to see and experience places by going everywhere and doing everything, then you’ll never have this problem. But I experience places by living in them. That’s what I enjoy. 

When I was about a month away from my departure date from Australia, however, the subject of where to go next eventually turned into an unavoidable fly buzzing in my ear. I’d toyed, loosely, with the idea of flying to Thailand and enjoying some sandy beaches - but the flights were fairly expensive (almost everywhere is, from Australia) so I wasn’t overly keen. I didn’t have any criteria with which to choose a destination, particularly, so I was pretty stumped… until I came across a random kiteboarding video on the internet. 

I grew up, amongst other places, in The Philippines. From the ages of 10 to 16 or so I referred to one of the larger of some 7,107 tropical islands as “home”. I hadn’t been back since my family moved to the UK in 2004, but just before leaving the country I visited a small island called Boracay (Google it, it’s worth it) for a holiday and witnessed kiteboarding for the first time. Kiteboarding, for those wondering what I’m on about, is a water sport where you strap a small board to your feet, and attach a massive kite (usually around 10 square meters) to your waist. The kite pulls you along through the water, or up into the sky, if you are so inclined. In 2004, kiteboarding was so new that most kiteboarders were still playing with the bubblewrap from the first kites ever produced. I watched for hours as the 3 or 4 people on Bulabog Beach went back and forth, occasionally glancing ungratefully at the windsurf board which I’d been given for my windsurfing lessons. Kiteboarding lessons were expensive. I never got a chance to try it.  Oh, and windsurfing sucked.

When I moved to the UK I was determined to learn how to do it, but with the prices for gear running close to the £2,000 ($3,100) mark… it was a little unrealistic for my 16yr old self. I bought a trainer kite and some DVDs, but that was about as far as I got for the subsequent 8 years. 

Sitting in Sydney, suddenly all of these thoughts returned to me in an instant. I’d found my criteria for where to travel to. From Australia, I returned to Boracay Island in The Philippines, to the exact same spot, and reclaimed that missed opportunity from all those years ago.

The Philippines was an interesting place to travel to after Australia. It was the first place I was going to where ironically, despite living there for so long, I knew nobody at all. I turned up with a bag full of new kiteboarding gear and AirBnB booking. The only remotely familiar was that I at least knew the country, the culture, and the island… somewhat.  A lot changes in 8 years. I’d pre-booked kiteboarding lessons with one of the schools, and 3 days after arriving I was in the water, strapped to a large kite, trying my very hardest not to drown myself. About 4 hours later I’d finished the entire 3 day course, (Turns out those DVDs and trainer kite sessions in the UK had paid off after all) and I was completely hooked - as I always knew I would be. 

This was, without doubt, the most pivotal moment of all of my travelling to date. 

It wasn’t just pivotal because I discovered kiteboarding, though that is certainly also true, it was pivotal because I learned a whole load of important things all in one go that I hadn’t considered before.

### First: What Makes Me Tick is Learning New Things

I’d never really thought about how much I enjoy learning new skills, but I really do. I loved learning to kiteboard not just because it was something I’d wanted to do for a long time, but because it was a challenge and something that would take real energy and concentration to figure out. All my favourite things in life have been things I’ve spent a great deal of time learning. From web design, to playing musical instruments (10 of them), to running a business. I now know that my criteria for travel is learning things that interest me, and going to specific places to do that. 

### Second: You’ll Never Actually Travel Alone if You Learn Things

Regardless of learning making me tick - I’d recommend everyone who’s going to travel alone to go and do courses in things (literally anything). I hadn’t figured out how to meet people when travelling alone before I got to The Philippines. I’m really not the sort of person who just starts talking to strangers for no particular reason. After 3 consecutive days at the kite school in Boracay, however, I’d met about 20 new people. Not just random people, but people I had something in common with. Roughly 8 weeks later I left The Philippines with 40+ new friends, and plans to meet several of them in various places all over the world. Now, if I go anywhere, I use kiteboarding (or learning something new) as a way to meet people who I have something in common with. A couple of months after The Philippines I ended up in Egypt, with one of the kite instructors who I’d met on Boracay. I haven’t actually travelled anywhere since The Philippines where I haven’t known at least 1 person, because of how this has all worked out.

### Third: Kiteboarding is an Amazing Travel Guide

Kiteboarding is an amazing sport. People travel all over the world to do it, and they go to kiteboarding specific destinations for it. Most of these places have excellent weather, aren’t particularly expensive, and are often away from the central tourist areas. I completely solved my “where to go next” problem. If I’m trying to decide on my next destination and I don’t have any conferences or press trips planned, I simply consult a website called “Need2Kite” for which country is currently in the midst of their windy season… and go there. 

So my advice, if you have no idea where to go, is to pick an activity which is interesting when done in different places around the world. Cooking, golf, kiteboarding, rock climbing, mountain biking, skydiving, hiking, art, surfing, skateboarding, photography… the list goes on. It will be different for everyone, but a passion that you have outside of work can prove to be an excellent travel guide. Kiteboarding makes me really excited to explore the places I’m going at the moment, and I know now that if I ever get bored of it I can learn something new and travel the world all over again seeing it all through a completely different set of eyes.

I tried some rock climbing and abseiling in the Blue Mountains in Australia. I think I could get very addicted to that.

### One Final Tip on Deciding Where to go: Don’t plan too much. 

The best things that happen when you travel, without doubt, are unplanned. You’ll meet people, you’ll discover stuff you enjoy, you’ll find out an infinite number of things that you could never possibly have planned for because you didn’t know they existed. You don’t want to discover stunning nearby island in Thailand with an entire house to rent for half the price of your hotel, when your hotel is booked and paid for the next month. You don’t want to get stuck in a country you don’t like, or have to leave a country you love, simply because you bought a round-the-world plane ticket and planned every flight and destination to go to for the next year. 

Plan as little as possible, and you’ll have a lot more fun. Plan as little as possible, and you’ll find yourself so much more open to discovering new things. Planning travel is like wearing a large pair of blinkers and deciding to only do and see the things you want to see, directly in front of you. Take the blinkers off and let yourself experience new things that you’ve never even imagined.

I only ever plan 1 thing: where to go next. Anything beyond that point in time is just an idea.

## How Long To Stay

As you start researching travelling around the world you’ll find that most people say the same: don’t go too fast. This is usually written with backpackers in mind - who for unknown reasons are generally desperately keen on going to a new country every 3 days. In terms of working and living, as we’re discussing here, longer in each place is also always better. I’ve found that the sweet spot is between 2 to 3 months, for a number of reasons. We’re talking about rented accommodation (which we’ll get to later), which is generally done on a monthly basis. Living somewhere (as opposed to visiting), which means cooking, cleaning, and and shopping locally - all of which take time to figure out and do. Working while travelling will eat into your time to experience the place you’re in. All of these things mean that the slower you go, the more you’re likely to enjoy the places you go. 2-3 months also makes the most use of your average visitors visa, without needing to pay to extend and get a longer, more complicated one.

Towards the end of my first year of travelling I ended up with back-to-back press trips, followed by a tour around the UK to catch up with friends and colleagues. To cut a long story short I ended up spending 2 full months not staying anywhere for longer than 1-4 nights. It was hell, and I was exhausted.

I try to think of about each place I go as living there, not visiting. I like to find an apartment I like, unpack all my bags, figure out where the good internet connections are, and buy my food and cook it. It’s a lot like normal life back in the UK, from a day to day point of view. You need some sort of routine and comfort to stay sane, I think. You certainly do in order to get any work done. We’ll get to that later, too.