# Chapter 8: Working

##The 4 Hour Work Day

Tim Ferriss sold the myth of the 4 Hour Work Week very well indeed, and it really is just that: a myth. Even Tim himself works many more than 4 hours a week. The other side to this, of course, is that not all of us are looking to escape from work. Personally, I enjoy my work and I find it very fulfilling. What I do want is a good work/life balance. Something which I didn’t really understand the meaning of when I lived in the UK. After about 6 months I worked out a system which is now my most effective productivity tool. I call it the 4 Hour Work Day. It’s not a myth this time, I actually do it, and it works.

The premise is simple: The average person is only productive for 4 hours per day. The rest of the day is wasted on distractions, meetings, interruptions, and general procrastination. For many, if not most, tasks - we perform based on the amount of time we’re given, not the amount of time required. If we’re given a week to do something, it will almost always take a week to complete - even if it’s only a day or two of work. If we’re given 8 hours in a working day to complete a task… we use the full 8 hours. 

I only give myself 4 hours a day to do all my work. If I work 4 solid productive hours, then I remove any feelings of guilt because I know that the average person is only productive for 4 hours anyway. The real key behind it though, is the motivation gained. I generally get up at 5am, and work until just after 9am. By the time most people have just arrived at the office and sat down at their desks… I’ve finished work for the day, and it’s time to do whatever I feel like. Usually I try to plan things to do with my day after 9am (often kiteboarding), so that I have a solid deadline to work towards and I know that all my work must be finished by 9am.

The best part? I notice zero loss in productivity from working like this. If anything I actually get more done, because I have something to look forward to each and every day which puts me in a good mood. It also gives me much more time to work on personal projects. Frequently what I choose to do with the rest of my day is still work, but it’s not client work. It’s given me the time and the freedom, for example, to write this book.

The system isn’t perfect. Nothing ever is. But I’d encourage you to give it a try and see how you get on. Working in this way has been the single most productive change that I’ve ever made to my freelance working career.

## Seasonal Productivity

Everyone’s productivity levels fluctuate, all the time. This is an unavoidable aspect of human nature, even though we spend our entire lives trying to fight it because society tells us that we’re “supposed” to be productive between the pre-determined hours of 9am and 5pm. As a freelancer, you probably already know this doesn’t work, and you probably work your own hours anyway. This is good, but you can also take it a step further. We don’t just fluctuate in productivity throughout the day, making some hours more suited to working than others. We also fluctuate throughout the week, month, and year. The sooner you can accept this, the more you’ll enjoy yourself. 

Initially I tried to work at least some hours every day, with the guilt kicking in if I didn’t. I’ve stopped doing that now. If I’m having an off day, I take the day off. There’s no point in procrastinating for 4 hours and doing remarkably little just to hit a time-worked target. I’ve learned to trust myself and know that I’ll fit all the hours in eventually. Some months I’ll work 1-2 hours every day with multiple days off in between - other months I’ll work 10-12 hours a day with no days off. I always hit my deadlines one way or another. 

I always try to aim for my 4 hours a day of work when I can but I’ve accepted that, like the weather, my productivity is seasonal - and it’s easier to work with it rather than fight against it.

### Monitoring Productivity

Seasonal or not, travelling or not, it’s a really good idea to actually keep track of your productivity. I use an app called RescueTime which tracks absolutely everything I do on my computer, 24 hours a day, and generates reports for me based on my activities. I can pick out trends over time and notice when I should give myself a break, or keep working. It also lets me pick out areas where I’m really wasting time unnecessarily. After my first month I realised that I’d spent 30 hours in total that month on Skype. Those quick and inconsequential instant messages were all adding up to something which was neither quick nor inconsequential. I no longer allow myself to have Skype open when I’m working.

### Working in Hot Environments

One of the biggest challenges I had to overcome that I didn’t really anticipate was concentrating on work in extremely hot conditions. I spent a lot of time in Egypt during my first year, with temperatures at a daily average of 38-42 degrees Celcius. Hot places are amazing, when you’re on holiday. When you want to relax or go out or just generally enjoy yourself - there’s nothing better than the sun shining brightly and lying around in a pair of shorts and flipflops. When you want to concentrate, however, particularly on a small computer screen… it’s hellish. 

The first few weeks that I tried to work in Egypt, I would end up falling asleep - constantly. My brain was constantly just going “IT’S WARM AND COMFORTABLE AND YOU’RE BEING BORING - I’M OUT”. 

Thanks, brain.

It’s very hard to concentrate when you’re sweating, there’s interesting things going on around you, and all you can think about is how much you’re not in the mood to do whatever it is you’re supposed to be doing. All of this is completely normal, you just have to find a way to deal with it. Here’s what worked for me:

As we’ve already discussed: early mornings. The hottest part of the day is at 12pm. In many countries located in temperate climates you’ll find that local businesses shut down around this time, too. It’s not just you - everyone struggles to work at this time of day. The earlier in the morning you can get your work done, the less you’ll have to deal with heat affecting your concentration. After the sun has set is also an option, but I generally find that there’s too many other things going on in the evening to be able to avoid distractions. Whatever you do, don’t try to force yourself into working hours which you (or society) deem to be “normal” - you have to adapt to your environment.

Have cold water to hand, always. It’s easy to get dehydrated in hot climates, which kills concentration, but cold water is also one of the most effective ways to cool your body’s core temperature. Cold water will cool you down much more effectively than a fan or air-conditioning unit. You’ll find that air-conditioning is often scarce, or expensive - so don’t rely on it being available. 

Get up and walk around periodically. People always say this, anyway, but in hot places it’s even more important. As soon as you start feeling tired, get up and do a lap of the house/apartment/block/whatever. I have a little app called Pomodoro which makes me work in 25 minute sprints, with a 5 minute break. I barely use this app normally, but when I’m in a hot place I have to use to maintain any sort of productivity.

(One tip for using Pomodoro: When the 25 minute bell goes, stop working immediately. Don’t finish your sentence / thought / line of code, just stop. If you carry on working to “finish that one bit” then it will be harder to start work again after the break, because you have some sense of being finished. If you stop right in the middle of something, it’ll be much easier to pick up where you left off and carry on. If you’re really worried about forgetting something important while you’re on your break, write yourself a very quick note, 5 words maximum.)

Take the case/skin off your laptop whenever you can and consider getting a rubber keyboard guard. The main downside to laptop skins and cases like those which we talked about in the gear chapter is that they insulate your computer slightly and impact cooling negatively. In most places this isn’t a problem, but when you’re in 40+ degree heat you’ll hear your fans spinning up when you open so much as TextEdit. Maximising your equipment cooling in these temperatures is imperative. On the Mac, there’s a dashboard widget called iStat Pro which will give you detailed temperature measurements that make it easy to monitor your machine’s health. It’s also not a bad idea to consider a rubber keyboard cover to stop all of the increased quantities of dust, sand and sweat which you’ll be subjecting you computer to in hot places.

A gentle breeze can work wonders. It won’t necessarily cool you down much, but moving air will make a big difference (even if only psychological) in giving your brain sufficient oxygen to concentrate. Find a place with a breeze or a (good) room fan to keep yourself from breathing thick, stagnant air for hours on end.

## Finding Wifi

My office may be wherever I wake up, but if I wake up somewhere without wifi… then I’ve got serious problems. This entire lifestyle revolves around the principle that as long as you can get online then you can work as normal. This means that finding an internet connection wherever you are is pretty much the single most important task on any of your travels, and everything else is dependent on it. Many, many of my travel decisions are based on where I can find reliable internet connections. I’ve chosen hotels, apartments, cities, even specific countries to visit (or not visit) purely on the basis of their available connectivity. In first world countries, it’s generally pretty easy - worst case scenario is finding a Starbucks. In second and third world countries, you have to do a little more research and get a little more creative.

The first thing to mention is that finding some form of internet is rarely an issue. Really. Even in some of the most remote countries you won’t struggle to find a 3G sim card, USB dongle, or local internet cafe. The hard part, always, is finding speed and reliability. If the only things I had to do online were email and web browsing - I would rarely have any problems. The issues kick in when you need to download a large file, update your software, backup your work to DropBox, work with a server over an FTP connection, or anything else that requires more than a 1MB connection. For this, I have a few tips on where to find wifi based on experience:

### Public Libraries

Found pretty much everywhere, “libraries” are large buildings where people can borrow “printed books”. It’s quite an antiquated concept, made redundant by the existence of the internet - which is like a very, very big library. Traditional libraries seem to have caught onto this, however, so these days public libraries are pretty much just big internet cafes with remarkably few customers. Where they really win is that they’re generally government subsidised, and can afford a good internet connection as a result.

### Public Hotspots

In some countries, public hot spots are all the rage. Provided that you’re a member of an affiliated hotspot partner, you can get online at hundreds (sometimes thousands) of different high speed internet connections all over a country. When these work, they work very well and cost very little. The problem with them is that they don’t work everywhere, so it’s almost never worth signing up for a long term contract. Boingo.com is one example of a world-wide hotspot provider where you’ll have mixed results. In South Korea, you’ll find a Boingo hotspot in the Airport, the train from the airport, the taxi from the train station, the restaurant you have lunch in, and the hotel you check into after lunch. In The Philippines, you’ll most likely never find a single one.

There are a lot of different hotspot providers out there, I don’t recommend any of them in particular. Boingo especially, have awful customer service and make it near impossible to cancel your account once you’ve given them your credit card details. The best thing to do is to regularly check the wifi networks when you arrive in a new country. If you constantly see “[xx] hotspot] popping up, it might be worth signing up with that provider for the duration of your stay. Just don’t be fooled by any worldwide or even regional hotspot offers that promise connectivity in hundreds of different countries no matter where you are. You never know what it’ll be like until you actually get there.

### Restaurants in Tourist-Heavy Areas

It’s much more common for restaurants to have good wifi than hotels. With a constant flow of foot-traffic throughout the day and a relatively small area to cover, restaurants rarely suffer from the network infrastructure issues which plague most hotels - which are spread across multiple floors and have people hammering their connections 24 hours a day. In areas of heightened tourist activity it’s common to find restaurants and cafes offering wireless to their overseas patrons. The quality of the connections are generally pretty hit and miss (but still better than hotels). For a cafe or restaurant a wifi connection is seen as an added bonus rather than a core service, so don’t expect them to care much if you complain about the speed.

### Local Knowledge

The final tip I would suggest is that get some local knowledge. This will, of course, be different wherever you go - but if you ask the other travellers to the area (rather than the people who live there) where the best wifi is, you’ll almost always get a short list of where to go… and where not to. Either way, have a fallback plan. If it looks like public wifi in your area is going to be sketchy, you might have to stump up the extra cash and pay for some expensive 3G data - and it’s almost always worth it in the end. There’s nothing more frustrating than urgently needing to get online to do your work and not being able to. Expect to spend some extra money here from time to time, and don’t begrudge it when it’s necessary.

## Dealing with Clients while on The Road

One of the most common questions I get from other freelancers about travelling full time is how I manage to deal with clients whilst moving around the world so much. I think a lot of this comes down to how you run your business rather than the travelling aspect of things. When I first started working for myself I had a lot of local clients, and local clients love face to face meetings more than they love cake. It wasted an enormous amount of my time, and usually their budget was inversely proportional to the number of meetings which they would request. So I did two things: First, I stopped taking on local businesses as clients, without exception. Second, whenever a client requested a meeting - I suggest a Skype conference call instead. None of them ever have a problem with it. I transitioned my freelance business to having zero location requirement or relevance long before I started travelling, just out of convenience. My best clients are by and large the ones who I’ve never met, because when it comes down to it, what they care most about is simply getting the work done.

One thing I do use to keep everyone happy during times of limited connectivity (so, always) is a service called AwayFind.com. It’s a simple GMail plugin which has a permanent auto-responder telling people that I travel full time, and it may take a little while to get back to them - but I’ll get back to them as soon as possible. There are two things which I like about it: first, unlike a normal auto-responder, it doesn’t send the same automatic reply every single time someone emails you (something which is generally annoying). It only sends the auto-responder once every 6 months (or whatever time frame you specify) per person. If it’s someone who emails me a lot, they’ll only be reminded twice per year that I’m travelling and reply to email a little less quickly than average. The other thing I like about it is that the auto-responder includes a link to a web-form where people can reach me with a message if there’s something very urgent which they need. This form automatically delivers a push notification and a text message to my phone, anywhere in the world.

## Easy Book Keeping with FreeAgent

How travelling affects my accounting, is another common question - and the simple answer is: it doesn’t. For tax purposes, I am still a UK resident, my business is still based in the UK, and I absolutely still pay UK taxes. (I choose to do this primarily so that I can remain a part of the UK’s National Health System, and return to England for free healthcare if I ever need it.) To keep me sane, I run all of my book keeping and accounting through an online service called FreeAgent.com. 

FreeAgent is an accounting web application, it allows you to track your finances directly from your bank account(s), manage contacts, create and send invoices, and do some very comprehensive tax calculations. When you sign up for FreeAgent you get your own URL (http://yourcompany.freeagentcentral.com) and log into a beautifully simple and easy-to-use accounting interface that is proven to relieve headaches. I tried several online and offline competitors of FreeAgent including Xero, FreshBooks, Billings, and a lot of others that I can’t even remember the names of. None of them did exactly what I wanted, they were all too complicated, too clunky, or too simple. In my opinion FreeAgent is the porridge that’s “just right”.

On my FreeAgent account I’ve set up both my business bank account, and my business Paypal account. Every month or two, I download an electronic statement from each of them, and upload them into FreeAgent. The first couple of times I had to explain to FreeAgent what each transaction was, bill payments, expenses, invoice payments, my own salary, bank charges, and the list goes on. The killer feature is that FreeAgent is smart, it learns every time you import transactions. Now when I import a fresh bank statement it automatically marks invoices and bills as paid when it sees the transactions, adds whatever I paid myself to my salary records, and updates all my tax calculations based on the new transactions.

I can generally do 3 months of book keeping in 15 minutes with FreeAgent, and then close it again. That’s what I really love about it.

There’s one more cool thing about it. It costs $20 per month (which is nothing, given how much time it saves you) - but every time you refer one of your friends to FreeAgent, they knock 10% off your monthly premium. So if you refer 10 people, it’s actually completely free.

If you want to give it a try, you can do a free 1 month trial to see what you think. Also, use my personal referral code, and you’ll get 10% off your monthly rate forever: 32wxrass

I hate accounting. I can’t recommend FreeAgent enough.

## Travel/Work Stress

The travelling office isn’t without its problems. More likely than not, at some point you’ll find yourself burned out, exhausted, and up against a deadline that you have neither the connectivity nor the inclination to hit. It happens. Even when you live in one place, sometimes client projects turn into a nightmare of Godzilla proportions - the travelling, at this point, unfortunately just makes it worse. Every so often I find myself completely overwhelmed by work, and I start panicking about being able to do everything I need to in time. What I’ve found helps the most in these situations is to take a step back from the work, cancel all your plans for a few days, and first allow yourself to unwind before trying to tackle anything. When you’re not in a home environment the stress of a difficult project can be quite hard to deal with at first - particularly without colleagues or friends nearby. 

Make a list of the most critical things that need to be completed and start working on one of them rather than thinking about the big picture. I tend to get more stressed than I need to be, and the solution for me is to work rather than think about work. The stress almost always passes quickly. Recognising it and dealing with it properly is the best way to prevent it from taking over your life.